[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. in the last
few videos we've been talking about some of
the disadvantages of using angles as a framework
for geometry and trigonometry one of the important
aspects of this is that if you try to use angles
then you are necessarily forced whether you like
it or not to consider the circular transcendental
functions the functions sin Theta cosine Theta
tan Theta and the more complicated ones cotan
cosecant and secant these functions are naturally
Associated to the geometry of a circle but because
we are introducing a circle or circular arcs to
measure angles they naturally appear and despite
what some people will try to convince you that
these are relatively easy functions they are in
fact quite complicated and they and their inverse
functions present a major challenge for young
people and Educators trying to teach young people
geometry when we first start learning angles in
public school we're made to think that it's very
simple because of the linear aspect of angles if
you have one angle of 25 and another angle of 28
then we're taught that we can add those angles
to get 53 there's almost always a picture like
this Associated to a question like this because
there's a slight ambiguity if the picture is
not there if the picture is not there then you
could easily make the mistake of thinking well
you might have an angle b a c like this of 25 but
then maybe the angle C A is like this c a d down
here if that was the picture you had in mind then
you would be more inclined to take the difference
between these angles as the resulting answer so
if you just know two angles knowing the combined
angle Le is really a situation where there's two
possibilities so that's one way in which angles
appear simple but are rather deceptive when these
young people are being taught this subject they're
often given many questions like this here's a
quadrilateral and you have three of the angles
and we would want to know the fourth angle it's
not too hard because the four angles sum up to
2 pi assuming you have appropriate convexity
and you have a picture that presents the angles
correctly this kind of question involving
angle chasing gives students confidence but
it's often a misplaced confidence because out
in the real world of applications engineering
surveying and so on this kind of angle chasing is
usually not the core problem most of the really
difficult aspects of dealing with angles in fact
relate to a diagram like this where you have a
right triangle with say side lengths a b and c
and one of these angles say that one there is
Theta and the important thing is that there's a
relationship between the angle and any one of the
ratios that you can obtain by looking at these
three quantities so B over C this ratio here
is connected in some way to Theta if you know
Theta then you know this ratio and if you know
this ratio then you know Theta but the connection
is a highly nonobvious connection and it's these
days given by this function sin Theta which is
usually defined in this way the ratio a over
C is called the cosine of theta and B over a is
called the tan of theta so in the modern setting
these three things are not so much ratios but
functions that take an input Theta and output the
ratio these definitions are
only valid when we have a
legitimate right triangle here when
the angle Theta is less than Pi / 2
1.57 equality is all right for these ones however
we need strict equality for this one otherwise
the a being zero will confuse things so natural
question is what happen s for bigger values of
theta and here most high school students have
another big conceptual jump to make as we go
from right triangles let look like this to the
geometry of the circle so after students learn
first the ratio definition of the cosine and S
and tan they then move to the circular definition
where we think of a point p on the unit circle
and that point p is associated to it an X and
a y coordinate now these are no longer distances
they are coordinates and there's a big difference
between coordinates and distances because the
coordinate is changing in a nice way as you
move along here while distance is not coordinates
be can become negative while distance is always
positive but it's the actual coordinates that
are involved now so we made a conceptual change
from distance to coordinates and this coordinate
X is is called now the cosine of the angle and the
Y is called The Sign of the angle and that's
valid for arbitrary angles even uh up to 360
or 2 pi unfortunately this definition makes it
very hard to calculate this function if you're
actually given concrete values and it's only
later in calculus after a few years of calculus
that students learn that there are series for
these functions unfortunately the development
of these series and the definitions are often
not really done very well in most undergraduate
treatments of calculus which often rely on high
school definitions of these functions instead of
giving very precise mathematical ones this is a
problem that was recognized by the great English
mathematician GH Hardy about 100 years ago who
pointed out very clearly that there was a serious
logical Gap in uh in most treatments of calculus
having to do with these functions unfortunately
it seems that most modern textbook writers
haven't uh studied Hardy and so the confusion
in the definition proper definition of these
trigonometric functions is still with us today
nevertheless the students learn to draw these
functions in a way and they learn lots of special
values having to do with the the two triangles
that they particularly love in ordinary geometry
the 90 6030 triangle and the 90 45 45 triangle
these are pretty well the only two triangles
that uh modern trigonometry gives students
the tools to deal with without a calculator
so it's all very complicated and there's a lot
of logical difficulties that are usually rolled
under the carpet in treatments of calculus books
when it comes to these trigonometric or circular
functions next time we're going to have a look
at an even more serious difficulty with modern
mathematics this is a very serious problem
that's going to have ramifications throughout
this series we're going to talk about functions
what exactly a function is what it should be and
the right way of thinking about it and also some
of the serious weaknesses with the current way
of thinking about functions I hope you'll join me
for that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for [Music]
listening